>> Woodruff: CLEAN GROUND WATER
RUNNING LOW.
THE WORLD'S LARGEST AQUIFERS
DEPLETING AT ALARMING RATES.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY:
WILL THE SUPREME COURT UPHOLD OR
SCRAP HEALTH CARE SUBSIDIES?
THE HIGH STAKES FOR AMERICANS,
WHO WAIT FOR THE HIGH COURT'S
DECISION.
>> IF THE SUBSIDY IS TAKEN AWAY,
ITS LIFE AND DEATH FOR ME.
YOU KNOW, ITS LIKE A TICKING
TIME BOMB.
>> Woodruff: THEN, THE U.S.
AANCEDVS INTO ELIMINATION
ROUNDS.
WHAT TO WATCH AS THE KNOCKOUT
PHASE BEGINS FOR WOMEN'S WORLD
CUP SOCCER.
>> Ifill: PLUS...
>> THE INTERNET IN CUBA IS VERY
MUCH A LUXURY FOR THOSE WHO CAN
AFFORD IT.
>> Ifill: LIFE DISCONNECTED IN
CUBA.
INTERNET ACCESS SLOWLY EXPANDS
BUT REMAINS TOO EXPENSIVE FOR
MOST.
>> THEY RECOGNIZE THE NEED FOR
CUBA TO BE CONNECT TO EDTHE
GLOBALIZED ECONOMY, BUT THEY'RE
TAKING IT PIECEMEAL, DAY BY DAY.
>> WoodruffTHOS: E ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE FEDERAL RESERVE
SENT THE CLEAREST SIGNAL YET,
TODAY, THAT INTEREST RATE HIKES
ARE COMING THIS YEAR.
THE FED'S OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
REPORTED ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IS
STRENGTHENING AGAIN, AFTER A
SLUMP IN THE FIRST QUARTER.
FED CHAIR JANET YELLEN SAID THE
KEY IS WHAT HAPPENS IN THE NEXT
FEW MONTHS.
>> MOST PARTICIPANTS ARE
ANTICIPATING THAT A RATE
INCREASE THIS YEAR WILL BE
APPROPRIATE.
NOW THAT ASSUMES AS YOU CAN SEE
THAT THEY'RE EXPECTING A PICK UP
IN GROWTH IN THE SECOND HALF OF
THIS YEAR AND FURTHER
IMPROVEMENT IN LABOR MARKET
CONDITIONS.
>> Ifill: THE FED POLICYMAKERS
MEET AGAIN IN LATE JULY.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA AND
TOP REPUBLICANS ARE SET TO
RESURRECT A TRADE BILL.
G.O.P. LEADERS SAY THE HOUSE
WILL VOTE TOMORROW ON GIVING THE
PRESIDENT STREAMLINED
NEGOTIATING POWER TO FINISH AN
ASIAN TRADE PACT.
THEY'LL VOTE SEPARATELY ON
AIDING WORKERS WHO LOSE THEIR
JOBS TO EXPORTS.
THAT PROVISION FAILED IN THE
HOUSE LAST FRIDAY, AS DEMOCRATS
REBELLED AGAINST THE PRESIDENT'S
TRADE AGENDA.
A.T.& T.'s BEEN SLAPPED WITH A
$100 MILLION FINE OVER ITS
UNLIMITED DATA PLANS.
THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSION RULED TODAY THE
COMPANY SHOULD HAVE TOLD
CONSUMERS THAT TRANSMISSION
SPEEDS WOULD SLOW DOWN, ONCE
USAGE REACHED CERTAIN LEVELS.
A.T. & T. INSISTED IT'S BEEN
FULLY TRANSPARENT AND WILL
CHALLENGE THE FINE.
>> Ifill: PENTAGON LEADERS
WARNED TODAY THE U.S. IS FALLING
SHORT IN TRAINING IRAQIS TO
FIGHT THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
DEFENSE SECRETARY ASH CARTER
BLAMED A LACK OF RECRUITS.
HE PROJECTED 7,000 FIGHTERS BY
FALL, INSTEAD OF THE HOPED-FOR
24,000.
CARTER APPEARED AT A HOUSE
HEARING WITH GENERAL MARTIN
DEMPSEY.
THE CHAIR OF THE JOINT CHIEFS
SAID SENDING AMERICAN TROOPS TO
THE FRONT IS NOT THE ANSWER.
>> I WOULD NOT RECOMMEND THAT WE
PUT U.S. FORCES IN HARMS WAY
SIMPLY TO STIFFEN THE SPINE OF
LOCAL FORCES.
IF THEIR SPINE IS NOT STIFFENED
BY THE THREAT OF ISIL AND THEIR
WAY OF LIFE, NOTHING WE DO IS
GOING TO STIFFEN THEIR SPINE.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA IS
SENDING ANOTHER 450 TROOPS, TO
ADVISE THE IRAQIS ON A COUNTER-
OFFENSIVE TO RETAKE THE CITY OF
RAMADI.
>> Woodruff: IN YEMEN, ISLAMIC
STATE SUPPORTERS CLAIMED A
SERIES OF BOMBINGS TODAY IN THE
CAPITAL, SANAA, THAT KILLED FOUR
PEOPLE AND WOUNDED 60.
THE TARGETS WERE TWO SHIITE
MOSQUES AND TWO OFFICES OF THE
SHIITE REBELS WHO CONTROL THE
CITY.
ISIS NOW JOINS HALF A DOZEN
FACTIONS FIGHTING EACH OTHER IN
YEMEN.
>> Ifill: HUNDREDS OF SYRIAN
REFUGEES HAVE BEGUN RETURNING
FROM TURKEY, AFTER KURDISH
FIGHTERS RECLAIMED THEIR
HOMETOWN FROM ISIS FORCES.
CONTROL OF TAL ABYAD CUTS A
VITAL SUPPLY LINE TO RAQQA, THE
MILITANTS' SELF-PROCLAIMED
CAPITAL.
REFUGEES LINED UP AT A TURKISH
BORDER CROSSING TODAY, WAITING
TO CROSS BACK INTO SYRIA.
SOME 23,000 FLED TO SAFETY
DURING THE FIGHTING.
>> Woodruff: RUSSIA AND NATO
TRADED VERBAL VOLLEYS TODAY OVER
EXPANDING THE RUSSIAN NUCLEAR
ARSENAL.
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
ANNOUNCED THE ADDITION TUESDAY
OF MORE THAN 40 INTERCONTINENTAL
BALLISTIC MISSILES, AND HE
TALKED OF OVERWHELMING WESTERN
DEFENSES.
TODAY, AS NATO STAGED EXERCISES
IN POLAND, ITS OVERALL COMMANDER
SHARPLY CRITICIZED THE KREMLIN'S
ACTIONS AND WORDS.
>> WHAT WE HAVE DONE IN THIS
EXERCISE IS EXACTLY RESPONDING
TO, AND OUR WAY OF BEING READY
FOR, THIS KIND OF IRRESPONSIBLE
RHETORIC.
WE SEE THESE KIND OF WORDS,
NORMAL AND RESPONSIBLE NUCLEAR
POWERS DON'T ACT LIKE THIS,
DON'T TALK LIKE THIS.
>> Woodruff: PUTIN'S MISSILE
ANNOUNCEMENT FOLLOWED WORD THAT
THE U.S. WILL STATION HEAVY
WEAPONRY IN EASTERN EUROPE.
BUT HIS TOP FOREIGN POLICY
ADVISER INSISTED TODAY THAT
RUSSIA IS NOT ENTERING AN ARMS
RACE WITH THE WEST.
>> Ifill: AT THE VATICAN, POPE
FRANCIS APPEALED TO CRITICS
TODAY TO LISTEN TO HIS VIEWS ON
CLIMATE CHANGE.
HE'LL ISSUE A LENGTHY ENCYCLICAL
ON THE ISSUE TOMORROW.
ACCORDING TO A LEAKED VERSION,
HE'LL ARGUE THAT BURNING FOSSIL
FUELS IS DRIVING GLOBAL WARMING.
AT HIS WEEKLY GENERAL AUDIENCE
TODAY, THE PONTIFF AIMED HIS
REMARKS AT CLIMATE CHANGE
SKEPTICS.
SKEPTICS. >> (translated
): THIS HOME OF
>> (translated): THIS
HOME OF OURS IS BEING RUINED AND
THAT
OURS IS BEING RUINED AND THAT
DAMAGES EVERYONE, ESPECIALLY THE
POOR. THIS IS THEN AN APPEAL ON
MY SIDE TOWARDS RESPONSIBILITY.
I ASK EVERYBODY TO WELCOME THIS
DOCUMENT, WITH AN OPEN SPIRIT.
>> Ifill: THE ENCYCLICAL COULD
BE THE MOST CONTROVERSIAL SINCE
1968, WHEN POPE PAUL THE SIXTH
ENSHRINED THE CHURCH'S BAN ON
BIRTH CONTROL.
>> Woodruff: CYBER-SECURITY
RESEARCHERS IN GERMANY ARE
SOUNDING A NEW ALARM OVER
THOUSANDS OF POPULAR APPS.
THEY SAID TODAY THE WAY MOST
APPS STORE DATA COULD MAKE IT
EASY FOR HACKERS TO FIND
PASSWORDS, PHYSICAL ADDRESSES
AND OTHER INFORMATION.
THE GERMAN TEAM SAYS SO FAR,
THERE'S NO EVIDENCE THAT ANYONE
HAS TRIED TO EXPLOIT THE
WEAKNESS.
>> Ifill: ON WALL STREET, STOCKS
MANAGED SMALL GAINS AFTER AN UP-
AND-DOWN DAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
WAS UP 31 POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE
17,930.
THE NASDAQ ADDED NINE POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 GAINED FOUR.
>> Woodruff: AND, THE GOLDEN
STATE WARRIORS RETURNED HOME TO
CALIFORNIA AFTER WINNING THEIR
FIRST N.B.A. CHAMPIONSHIP IN 40
YEARS.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
UNSUSTAINABLE STRESS ON WATER
RESOURCES WORLDWIDE.
AMERICANS AWAIT A SUPREME COURT
DECISION OVER HEALTH CARE
SUBSIDIES.
TWO LOOKS AT SOCCER WORLDWIDE.
ELIMINATIONS ROUNDS BEGIN AT THE
WOMEN'S WORLD CUP, AND A PROFILE
OF NEPALESE MIGRANTS BUILDING
STADIUMS IN QATAR.
CONNECTING CUBANS TO AN OPEN,
AFFORDABLE INTERNET.
WHY MORE CITIES ARE BANNING THE
BOX THAT REQUES JIROB APPLICANTS
TO DISCLOSE THEIR CRIMINAL
RECORD.
AND, HOW A FEW PAKISTANI DOCTORS
ARE TYRING TO CHANGE CULTURAL
VIEWS OF MENTAL ILLNESS.
>> Woodruff: HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE AROUND THE
WORLD DEPEND ON THE USE OF
UNDERGROUND ROCK FORMATIONS
KNOWN AS AQUIFERS TO GET THE
CLEAN WATER THEY NEED.
MANY OF THE LARGEST AQUIFERS ARE
BEING DEPLETED AT ALARMING
RATES.
AS SEEN ON THIS MAP, OF THE 37
LARGEST ONES IN THE WORLD, 21
ARE LOSING MORE WATER THAN IS
BEING REPLACED, WITH THOSE AREAS
IN ORANGE AND RED SHOWING MUCH
MORE SERIOUS PROBLEMS WITH
DEPLETION.
THESE ARE LOCATED IN COUNTRIES
LIKE CHINA, RUSSIA AND AUSTRALIA
AS WELL AS INDIA, WHERE WATER
RESOURCES ARE ALREADY A MAJOR
PROBLEM.
THE REPORTS ALSO IDENTIFY
DECLINING LEVELS FOR
CALIFORNIA'S CENTRAL VALLEY
AQUIFER.
JAY FAMIGLIETTI IS A LEAD AUTHOR
ON ONE OF THE REPORTS FROM
NASA'S JET PROPULSION
LABORATORY.
HE JOINS ME NOW.
HE WELCOME, MR. FAMIGLIETTI,
REMIND ES WHAT IS AN
AQUA-- AQUIFER AND HOW DOES
IT PRODUCE THE CLEAN WATER.
>> AN AQUIFER IS AN
UNDERGROUND SOIL OR ROCK
THAT CONTAINS WATER IN ITS
PORE SPACES AND THE WAY WE
GET AT THAT WATER IS BY
DRILLING WELLS AND PUMPING
IT UP FROM THE SUBSURFACE.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT DID
THESE TWO STUDIES FIND?
>> WE FOUND THAT IN THE THE
37 WORLD'S LARGEST AQUIFERS
THAT WE LOOKED AT, THAT OVER
21 OF THEM ARE PAST
SUSTAINABILITY TIPPING
POINTS.
MEANING THAT THE RATE OF
WITHDRAWAL EXCEEDS THE RATE
OF REPLENISHMENT.
AND OF THOSE WE FOUND THAT
13 ARE IN A PRETTY BAD WAY
AN THREATEN TO EXCEED A
POINT AT WHICH THEY MAY NOT
COME BACK.
>> Woodruff: AND WHY IS THIS
HAPPENING?
>> WELL, WE RELY HEAVILY ON
GROUND WATER.
BUT YET WE DON'T MANAGE IT
VERY WELL.
AROUND THE WORLD WE USE
ABOUT 2 BILLION PEOPLE RELY
ON GROUND WATER AS A PRIMARY
WATER SOURCE.
AND IT PROVIDES ABOUT HALF
OF THE WATER THAT WE NEED TO
IRRIGATE AGRICULTURE.
SO WE RELY ON IT HEAVILY.
BUT WE DON'T MANAGE IT VERY
WELL.
AND THAT'S TRUE IN THE
UNITED STATES AS WELL AS
AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Woodruff: SO IS THIS
DEPLETION HAPPENING AT A
FASTER RATE THAN IT DID
HISTORICALLY?
>> IN SOME PLACES, YES.
IT'S TAKEN AWHILE FOR
POPULATION IN A PARTICULAR
REGION TO DEVELOP, OR IT'S
TAKEN AWHILE FOR THE
INFRASTRUCTURE TO COME INTO
PLACE.
FOR EXAMPLE N NORTHWESTERN
INDIA, THE GREEN REVOLUTION
IS SOMETHING THAT DIDN'T
START UNTIL THE 1960s AND
1970s.
PRIOR TO THAT THERE WASN'T
MUCH GROUND WATER DEPLETION.
>> Woodruff: LET'S TALK FOR
A MINUTE ABOUT WHERE THIS IS
HAPPENING.
WE MENTIONED ON SEVERAL
CONTINENTS.
WHERE IS THE PROBLEM THE
WORST?
>> PROBABLY THE WORST IN THE
MIDDLE EAST.
THE ARABIAN PENINSULA AND
EVEN THE REGION ABOVE THE
ARABIAN PENINSULA, TURKEY,
SYRIA, IRAQ AND IRAN ARE
REGIONS WE HAVE STUDIED
BEFORE.
NORTHWESTERN INDIA, REALLY
ACROSS NORTHERN INDIA INTO
BANGLADESH IS IN PRETTY
ROUGH SHAPE.
THE NORTH CHINA PLAIN, THE
BIG AQUIFER SYSTEM AROUND
BEIJING, IT IS ON EVERY
CONTINENT.
THE PILLBOROUGH MINING
REGION WHICH IS THE CANNING
BASIN IN NORTHWESTERN
AUSTRALIA, SEVERAL OF THE
AQUIFERS IN AFRICA ARE IN
ROUGH SHAPE BECAUSE THERE'S
VERY LITTLE RAINFALL THERE
IN THE SAHARA DESERT.
IS NOT VERY MUCH
REPLENISHMENT AN IN
ARGENTINA, THE AQUIFER AND
THE AQUIFERS OF THE UNITED
STATES, BIG ONES BEING THE
CENTRAL VALLEY.
AND THE HIGH PLAINS.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT ABOUT
THE ONE IN CALIFORNIA
CENTRAL VALLEY, WHAT HAPPY
IS THAT?
>> THAT'S IN PRETTY ROUGH
SHAPE.
THIS STUDY AND OTHER STUDIES
THAT WE'VE DONE ON THE
AQUIFER SHOW THAT WE'VE BEEN
LOSING ABOUT FIVE AND A HALF
TRILLION GALLONS OF GROUND
WATER PER YEAR FOR THE LAST
FOUR YEARS DURING THIS
DROUGHT.
AND THAT'S BECAUSE IN
CALIFORNIA RIGHT NOW,
THERE'S NO SNOW IN THE
MOUNTAINS, THERE'S NO
RAINFALL HAPPENING THERE IS
VERY LITTLE WATER IN OUR
RESERVOIRS SO, WE HAVE TO
RELY ON THIS GROUND WATER
AND IT'S DISAPPEARING PRETTY
RAPIDLY.
>> Woodruff: IS THERE A WAY
OF KNOWING HOW MUCH MORE
WATTER THERE IS, WHEN IT'S
GOING TO RUN OUT.
AND IS THERE ANYTHING THAT
CAN BE DONE ABOUT THIS?
>> SO THAT'S AN EXCELLENT
QUESTION.
THAT WAS REALLY THE TOPIC OF
THE SECOND PAPER.
AND SO WE TRIED TO EXPOSE
THE FACT THAT WE REALLY
DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH WATER WE
HAVE IN THE WORLD'S MAJOR
AQUIFERS.
AGAIN IT'S TRUE IN THE
UNITED STATES AND TRUE
AROUND THE WORLD.
WE KNOW THAT WE'RE PASSED
THE SUSTAINABILITY TIPPING
POINTS IN ALL KINDS OF
ECOLOGICAL DAMAGE IS
OCCURRING.
AND WE KNOW THAT THE WATER
TABLES ARE FALLING AND WELLS
ARE RUNNING DRY.
SO I THINK IT'S VERY
IMPORTANT THAT WE THINK VERY
CAREFULLY ABOUT EXPLORING
THE WORLD'S MAJOR AQUIFERS
TO UNDERSTAND HOW MUCH WATT
CERTIFICATE ACTUALLY THERE.
>> Woodruff: WELL, IT'S A
GRIM SET OF FINDINGS THAT I
KNOW A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO BE PAYING CLOSE
ATTENTION TO, JAY
FAMIGLIETTI, THANK YOU FOR
BEING WITH US.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: BEFORE THE MONTH IS
OUT, THE SUPREME COURT IS
EXPECTED TO ISSUE A DECISION
THAT COULD DETERMINE THE FATE OF
MUCH OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT,
OFTEN REFERRED TO AS OBAMACARE.
THAT CASE-- KING VERSUS BURWELL-
- WILL DETERMINE WHETHER
SUBSIDIES THE GOVERNMENT
PROVIDES TO PURCHASE HEALTH
INSURANCE ARE LEGAL.
NEARLY THREE DOZEN STATES USE
THE FEDERAL EXCHANGE, AND THE
CASE IS WHETHER SUBSIDIES USED
IN THOSE STATES ARE VALID.
TO ILLUSTRATE SOME OF THE
CONCERNS AT STAKE, WE SPOKE TO
THREE PEOPLE NOW RECEIVING
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT COVERAGE
ABOUT HOW THE SUPREME COURT
DECISION MIGHT CHANGE THEIR
LIVES.
>> MY NAME IS SUE LEE
HAMILTON, I LIVE IN RICHMOND,
VIRGINIA.
AND I'M CURRENTLY RECEIVING
A SUBSIDY FOR THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT.
THE SUBSIDY IS VERY
IMPORTANT TO ME BECAUSE
ABOUT A YEAR AGO I WAS
DIAGNOSED WITH MESSO THEO
YOMA WHICH IS A VERY SERIOUS
FORM OF CANCER AND IN MY
CASE AFFECTED MY LUNGS.
I HAD TO SEE AN EXPERT AT
DUKE UNIVERSITY.
AND HE PRESCRIBED TREATMENT
WHICH INCLUDED CHEMOTHERAPY
AND AN OPERATION TO REMOVE
MY LEFT LUNG.
SINCE THE TREATMENT WAS
PROLONGED, AND I WAS SICK
DURING MY CHEMOTHERAPY, I
WAS RECEIVING SHORT-TERM
DISABILITY.
BUT WHEN THAT RAN OUT, MY
COMPANY WAS FORCED TO LET ME
AND I WENT ON DISABILITY
INSURANCE.
I DECIDED TO KEEP MY
COMPANY'S INSURANCE THROUGH
COBRA BUT I WAS HAVING A
HARD TIME AFFORDING THE
PREMIUM.
IN NOVEMBER, I WENT TO A
WORKSHOP THAT EXPLAINED THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
AND THERE WERE COUNSELORS
THERE THAT HELPED ME GET
SIGNED UP AND CHOOSE A PLAN.
THEY ALSO EXPLAINED TO ME
THE SUBSIDY THAT QUALIFIED
FOR.
WITH MY $498 SUBSIDY, THE
PREMIUM COMES DOWN DO $137 A
MONTH WHICH IAN C AFFORD.
AS I'M WATCHING THE SUPREME
COURT AS THEY'RE MAKING
THEIR DECISION, I'M FEELING
VERY ANXIOUS ABOUT LOSSING
MY HEALTH CARE BECAUSE I
WILL NEED FOLLOWUP CARE FOR
THE REST OF MY LIFE.
>> MY NAME IS MICHAEL COLE.
I LIVE HERE IN BELLEVILLE,
MICHIGAN WHICH IS A SU BURR
OF ANN ARBOR OR DETROIT, THE
ACA AFFECTED ME A NEGATIVE
WAY.
MY PREMIUMS HAVE GONE UP
FROM $300 SOME ODD DOLLARS A
MONTH IN 20 SO UP TO $850 A
MONTH NOW.
FOR ACTUALLY LESS INSURANCE
THAN I HAD PREVIOUSLY.
I HAD TO MAKE SOME TOUGH
DECISIONS AND ONE OF THEM
WAS TO CLOSE MY OFFICE IN
BELLEVILLE HERE AND MOVE TO
MY HOME OFFICE.
THE SAVING ABOUT $4 OR
$5,000 IN RENT, INSURANCE
AND UTILITIES SO I COULD PAY
THE ADDITIONAL PREMIUMS AM I
DON'T HAVE THE SAME CHOICES
OF DOCTORS THAT I USED TO
HAVE, CAN'T USE THE SAME
LABS FOR BLOOD TESTING THAT
I USED TO.
I'M COVERED FOR THINGS THAT
I DON'T NEED AND I'M PAYING
ALMOST $400 OR $5,000 A YEAR.
WHAT I'M HOPING FOR THE
SUPREME COURT DECISION IS
THAT THE CONGRESS AND THE
PRESIDENT ACTUALLY SIT DOWN
AND NEGOTIATE A BIPARTISAN
FIX FOR ALL OF THIS.
>> MY NAME IS VANNITA,
GENERAL SON, LIVE IN
HIGHLAND PARK, INCH MITCH
WITH MY DAUGHTER IT CANDACE
WALKER.
I'M A SECURITY OFFICER AT
THE COLLEGE OF CREATIVE
STUDIES IN DETROIT, MICHIGAN,
AND I RECEIVE SUBSIDIES FROM
THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE.
I WORK FOR DETROIT PUBLIC
SCHOOLS FOR TEN YEARS.
AND I HAD BLUE CROSS AND
BLUE SHIELD WHICH MY
EMPLOYER PAID FOR.
I HAD FULL COVERAGE.
I HAD VERY GOOD HEALTH CARE
INSURANCE NOT ONLY FOR
MYSELF B ALSUTO FOR MY
CHILDREN.
AND AS OF JULY 30th, 2010,
MY EMPLOYMENT WAS TERMINATED
AND I LOST ALL MY HEALTH
CARE INSURANCE.
NOT ONLY FOR MYSELF BUT FOR
MY CHILDREN ALSO.
I COULDN'T AFFORD THE COBRA.
SO I HAD TO GO WITHOUT
INSURANCE FOR THREE YEARS.
IT WAS DEVASTATING.
I COULDN'T GO TO THE DOCTOR.
I NEEDED MEDICATION TO
CONTROL MY HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE.
MY ALLERGIES AND MY ACID
REFLUX.
AND I COULDN'T AFFORD TO GO
TO THE DOCTOR.
WHEN AT FORDABLE HEALTH CARE
STARTED I SIGNED UP RIGHT
AWAY.
I CALLED THE NUMBER AND THEY
WALKED ME ALL THE WAY
THROUGH IT WAS ABLE TO GO TO
THE DOCTOR ON A REGULAR
BASIS.
I WAS ABLE TO GET MY
MEDICATION.
I WAS ALSO, MY DAUGHTER WAS
ABLE TO HAVE HER SURGERY.
SHE HAD-- THEY DISCOVERED A
LUMP ON HER BREAST.
SO SHE WAS ABLE TO GET THAT
DONE.
SO IT WAS LIBERATING, YOU
KNOW.
IT TOOK A WEIGHT OFF OF ME.
AS I LOOK AT THIS, THE KING
VERSUS BURWELL AND HOW IT
WILL AFFECT ME AND MY CHILD,
IF THEY DECIDE TO STOP THE
SUBSIDIES, I WON'T HAVE
INSURANCE.
I WILL BE BACK AT STEP ONE
LIKE I WAS BACK IN 2010.
>> Ifill: NOW JOINING US FOR
A BROADER VIEW OF THE STAKES
FOR MILLIONS OF AMERICANS IS
JULIE ROVNER WHO COVERS THIS
FOR KAISER HEALTH NEWS.
SO JULIE, START BY TELLING
US WHAT THOSE VOICES WE JUST
LISTENED TO ARE BASICALLY
TELLING US?
>> WELL, THEY ARE
REPRESENTATIVE OF OF A
COUPLE OF THINGS.
ONE IS THERE ARE WINNERS AND
LOSERS OF THE AFFORDABLE
CARE AGO.
IF THE SUPREME COURT WERE TO
STRIKE DOWN THE SUBSIDIES IN
THE STATES THAT ARE USING
HEALTHCARE.GOV, THERE WOULD
BE A DIFFERENT SET OF
WINNERS AND LOSERS SO IT
WOULD DEFINITELY SHAKE
THINGS UP QUITE A LOT.
>> SO WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THREE BASIC ISSUES HERE.
PREEXISTING CONDITIONS WHICH
OF COURSE IS THE PART, THE
ADMINISTRATION LIKES TO TALK
ABOUT.
SUBSIDIES, SUPPORT FOR
PEOPLE WHO CAN'T OTHERWISE
AFFORD TO PAY, AND THEN THE
CONCERN ABOUT THE PREMIUMS,
WHETHER PREMIUMS ARE
BECOMING TOO EXPENSIVE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT THIS HAS
ALWAYS BEEN SEEN AS A THREE
LEGGED STOOL, AS THEY SAY,
THAT IN ORDER TO ALLOW
PEOPLE WHO HAVE PREEXISTING
CONDITIONS TO GET COVERAGE,
YOU HAVE TO GET A BIGGER
POOL.
YOU HAVE TO GET HEALTHY
PEOPLE.
IN ORDER TO GET HEALTHY
PEOPLE TO BE ABLE TO AFFORD
INSURANCE YOU HAVE TO GIVE
THEM THE PREMIUM SUBSIDIES.
IF YOU KNOCK OUT ANY ONE OF
THOSE IT MAKES THE OTHER TWO
WORK NOT SO WELL.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK ABOUT
THE ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS
THOSE FOLKS WE HEARD FROM.
THE FIRST IS JULIE HAMILTON.
WE HEARD HER TALKING ABOUT
SUBSIDIES, LET'S HEAR HER
QUESTION.
>> IF THE SUPREME COURT
DECIDES THAT SUBSIDIES CAN'T
CONTINUE IN STATES LIKE
VIRGINIA, HOW SOON WILL MI
SUBSIDY END.
>> THIS IS THE SOURCE OF A
LOT OF DEBATE.
GENERALLY SUPREME COURT
DECISIONS TAKE AFFECT 25
DAYS AFTER THEY'RE ISSUED.
THAT GIVES THE LOSING PARTY
TIME TO BASIC GO BACK AND
ASK THEM TO RECONSIDER.
THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF TALK
ABOUT THERE HAS BEEN A 90
DAY GRACE PERIOD FOR SOME
PEOPLE.
BUT THOSE ARE PEOPLE WITH
SUBSIDIES.
SO IF YOU HAVE A SUBSIDY,
THEN YOU GET 90 DAYS BEFORE
THEY CAN END YOUR INSURANCE.
IN THIS CASE, THOUGH, THESE
PEOPLE WON'T HAVE SUBSIDIES
ANY MORE.
SO MOST OF THEM WILL ONLY
GET WHATEVER THEIR STATE A
YOU LAS THAT IS NORMALLY 30
DAYS.
SO BASICALLY 30 DAYS AFTER
YOU DON'T PAY YOUR PREMIUM
WHICH FOR MOST PEOPLE IN
THIS CASE WOULD BE AUGUST
1st.
THEN INSURANCE COMPANIES
WOULD START TO CANCEL
POLICIES, THAT WOULD BE
SEPTEMBER 1st.
>> Ifill: WE HAVE AN
ADDITIONAL QUESTION FOR
MICHAEL COLE, THE MAN WHO
HASN'T BEEN SO THRILLED WITH
THE WAY IN IS WORKING.
>> IF THE SUPREME COURT
RULES AGAINST THE SUBSIDIES,
WHEN WILL THE SYSTEM BALANCE
OUT?
WILL IT-- WILL MY PREMIUMS
GO DOWN?
WILL SOMEBODY ELSE'S
PREMIUMS GO UP?
DO YOU SEE AN END TO THIS OR
WILL IT CREATE CHAOS?
>> I THINK IT'S PRETTY MUCH
A CONSENSUS THAT THERE WOULD
BE CHAOS IN THE MARKETS THAT
WOULD BE AFFECTED BY THIS.
IN THE STATES THAT HAVE
THEIR OWN EXCHANGES,
EVERYTHING WOULD PRETTY MUCH
GO ALONG AS IT IS YOU NO.
BUT IN STATES INCLUDING-- STATE
THERE WOULD BE QUITE A MESS,
MOST OF THE PREMIUM WAS GO
UP.
I'M NOT SURE ANY OF THE
PREMIUM WAS GO DOWN.
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IS PEOPLE
WHO COULD NO LONGER AFFORD
INSURANCE WOULD MOSTLY DROP
OUT.
PEOPLE WHO WERE SICK AND
REALLY NEED THEIR INSURANCE,
WOULD STAY IN.
SO THE GROUP OF PEM WHO ARE
INSURED WOULD BE MORE
EXPENSIVE OVERALL AND SO
EVERYBODY WHO REMAINS IN
THAT POOL, THEIR PREMIUMS
WOULD GO UP.
IT IS HARD TO SEE WHOSE
PREMIUM WAS GO DOWN IN THAT
SITUATION.
I THINK WHAT PEOPLE HOPE
MIGHT HAPPEN IS THAT
CONGRESS MIGHT GET TOGETHER
WITH THE PRESIDENT AND WORK
SOMETHING OUT.
BUT EVEN THE REPUBLICANS BY
THEMSELVES HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE
TO COME TO ANY CONSENSUS ON
WHAT THEY SHOULD DO IF THE
SUPREME COURT ACTS FOR THE
CHALLENGERS.
THE IDEA THEY COULD GET
SOMETHING THEY COULD AGREE
ON WITH PRESIDENT OBAMA I
THINK EVERYBODY AGREES MAY
BE A LITTLE FARFETCHED.
>> Ifill: AND ANOTHER
QUESTION.
>> DOT INDIVIDUAL STATES
HAVE A PLAN IF THEY DECIDE
TO STOP THE SUBSIDIES?
>> WELL, A COUPLE OF THEM
DO.
BUT IT'S NOT CLEAR HOW
QUICKLY THAT COULD TAKE
AFFECT.
THERE IS A LOT OF
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT WHETHER
STATES CAN JUST WRITE A
ONE-PAGE LETTER TO THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SAYING WE
ESTABLISH AN EXCHANGE ON
PAPER AND WE STILL WANT TO
USE HEALTHCARE.GOV AND WE'LL
LEASE IT.
THERE ARE THOSE THAT SAY IF
STATES TRY TO DO THAT THEY
WILL GO BACK AND SUE AND
SAYS THAT'S NOT RIGHT.
SO THERE IS A LOT OF
UNCERTYF COURSE
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT WHAT
EXACTLY THE COURT WILL DO.
WHAT THEY WILL SAY, WHICH
STATES IN PARTICULAR WILL BE
AFFECTED BUT GENERALLY
NOBODY HAS A VERY GOOD
CONTINGENCY PLAN.
>> Ifill: THAT'S WHAT I WAS
GOING TO ASK YOU, SHE ASKED
ABOUT THE STATES.
I'M CURIOUS ABOUT THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
WE HAVE ALL HAD
CONVERSATIONS WITH THE
SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES AND THE ONE
QUESTION SHE STOPPED SHORT
OF SAYING, WHAT IS THE PLAN
B.
ANY BETTER INDICATION OF
THAT?
>> NO, AND SHE'S BEEN ASKED
SEVERAL TIMES INCLUDING AT A
CONGRESSIONAL HEARING LAST
WEEK.
THE ADMINISTRATION'S
OFFICIAL LINE IS WE DON'T
THINK THE SUPREME COURT WILL
RULE FOR THE CHALLENGERS SO
WE DON'T HAVE A CONTINGENCY
PLAN.
IT'S NOT CLEAR WHETHER
THAT'S REALLY THE CASE.
BUT CERTAINLY THERE'S NOT
VERY MUCH THEY COULD DO
LEGALLY IN THIS SITUATION.
IT WOULD REALLY BE UP TO
CONGRESS TO FIX IT.
CONGRESS COULD FIX IT WITH A
ONE-LINE BILL BUT NOBODY
THINKS THEY'RE GOING TO.
SO THE QUESTION IS WHAT
CONGRESS WILL THEN DO.
BUT IT WILL BE I THINK MORE
IN CONGRESS'S COURT THAN IT
WILL BE IN THE
ADMINISTRATION AND THE
STATES.
>> Ifill: ONCE AGAIN HOW
MANY PEOPLE ARE WE TALKING
ABOUT AFFECTED BY THIS
OUTCOME.
>> ABOUT 6.5 MILLION PEOPLE
IN THOSE STATES THAT COULD
BE AFFECTED WHO HAVE
SUBSIDIES.
THE URBAN INSTITUTE SAID
THERE IS ANOTHER MILLION AND
A HALF PEOPLE OR SO WHO
COULD BE AFFECTED INDIRECTLY
BECAUSE THEY HAVE THEIR OWN
INSURANCE IN THOSE STATES
WHOSE PREMIUMS COULD SPIKE.
>> Ifill: HUGE CONSEQUENCES
AT THE END OF THE SUPREME
COURT TERM AS ALWAYS.
JULIE ROVNER, THANK YOU FOR
HELPING US EXPLAIN IT.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, TWO LOOKS AT
THE WORLD CUP AND FIFA, THE
GOVERNING BODY OF SOCCER.
THE U.S. WOMEN'S SOCCER TEAM HAS
ADVANCED TO THE NEXT ROUND OF
PLAY WITH A WIN LAST NIGHT
AGAINST NIGERIA.
VETERAN PLAYER ABBY WOMBACH
SCORED THE ONLY GOAL IN A ONE-
TO-NOTHING WIN.
NANCY ARMOUR IS COVERING THE CUP
FOR "USA TODAY" AND BRINGS US UP
TO DATE ON THE CHALLENGES THE
U.S. TEAM FACES.
SHE WAS IN THE STADIUM IN
VANCOUVER LAST NIGHT AND JOINS
ME NOW.
NANCY ARMOUR, WELCOME.
HOW BIG A SURPRISE AND HOW
BIG A DEAL WAS THIS WIN LAST
NIGHT?
>> THE WIN LAST NIGHT WAS
HUGE.
FOR A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
REASONS.
NUMBER ONE IS THE CONFIDENCE
FACTOR.
YOU WANT TO GET OUT OF YOUR
GROUP WITH A WIN.
YOU WANT TO GET OUT ON TOP.
YOU WANT TO BE CONSIDERED
ONE OF THE TEAMS THAT IS
DOING THE BEST BUT THERE IS
A LOGISTIC ASPECT TO THIS
TOO.
HAD THE U.S. FINISHED SECOND,
THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN LOOKING
AT PLAYING CLEAR ACROSS THE
COUNTRY TO MONCTON IN NEW
BRUNTION WICK TO PLAY BRAZIL
WHICH IS ONE OF THE OTHER
CONTENDERS FOR THE TITLE.
INSTEAD, THEY WILL PLAY HERE
IN EDMONTON AND GET AN EXTRA
DAY OF REST.
THEIR GAME IS NOT UNTIL
TUESDAY.
>> Woodruff: .
>> SO IT WAS A SIGNIFICANT
WIN FOR THEM.
>> Woodruff: YOU MENTIONED
THE ONLY GOAL WAS SCORED BY
ABBY WOMBACH THERE WAS A LOT
OF TALK ABOUT HER,
PARTICULARLY ABOUT HER AGE,
AT THE RIPE OLD AGE OF 35.
AND YET YOU WROTE TODAY
SHE'S THE GREATEST GOAL
SCORER TO PLAY THE GAME.
>> WELL, SHE HAS MORE GOALS
THAN ANYBODY ELSE IN THE
GAME, MALE OR FEMALE.
AND IT ALWAYS SEEMS WHEN THE
U.S. ABSOLUTELY POSITIVELY
NEEDS A GOAL, SHE DELIVERS.
SHE DID IT IN THE WORLD CUP
FOUR YEARS AGO AND SHE DID
IT LAST NIGHT.
SHE ALSO HAD A COUPLE OTHER
CHANCES AT SCORING TOO, I
THINK WE'RE STARTING TO SEE
HER COME OUT OF YOU WANT TO
CALL IT A FUNK OR SLUMP, I
THINK WE SEE HER COMING OUT
OF THAT.
>> Woodruff: WHAT CHALLENGES
LIE AHEAD FOR THIS U.S.
TEAM?
>> WELL, THE BIGGEST THING
IS THAT THE GAME, THE PARODY
IN THE GAME HAS JUST GROWN
INCREDIBLY.
YOU'RE SEEING TEAMS LIKE
COLOMBIA, CAME A RON, NOT
THE TRADITIONAL POWERHOUSES
DOING WELL, FOR THE U.S. IT
IS NO LONGER ABOUT THE FACT
THAT THEY HAVE THE BETTER
ATHLETES, THAT THEY HAVE
MORE DEPTH THAN ANYBODY
ELSE.
THEY HAVE TO PLAY BETTER
THERE ARE NO GIMME GAMES IN
THIS TOURNAMENT ANY MORE.
THEY ARE ALL-- THEY HAVE TO
PLAY BECAUSE ONCE THE
KNOCKOUT ROUNDS START, YOU
LOSE, YOU GO HOME.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT, WHO
AND WHAT SHOULD FANS BE
LOOKING OUT FOR?
>> WELL, THEY WILL HAVE THE
ROUND OF 16 GAME WHICH WILL
PROBABLY BE COLOMBIA, NEXT
WEEK.
AND QUARTERFINAL GAME.
THEY PROBABLY WON'T GET
THEIR BIGGEST TEST UNTIL THE
SEMI FINALS BUT THAT COULD
BE A BIG ONE.
THAT COULD BE GERMANY WHICH
IS CONSIDERED THE OTHER
FAVOURITE FOR THE TITLE.
>> THERE'S ALSO BEEN TALK
ABOUT ANOTHER PLAYER ON THE
U.S. TEAM, HOPE SOLO.
HOW MUCH OF A CONTROVERSY IS
THAT AND HOW MUCH BEARING ON
HOW THIS TEAM IS DOING?
>> THE TEAM SAYS IT'S NOT
AFFECTING THEM AT ALL.
THAT THIS IS SOMETHING THEY
DEALT WITH MONTHS AGO, THAT
THEY ARE NOT CONCERNED ABOUT
IT BUT THERE IS A LOT OF
PUBLIC SENTIMENT, PEOPLE
WANTING TO KNOW WHY SHE IS
ON THE TEAM AND WHY U.S.
SOCCER DIDN'T DO ANYTHING
ABOUT IT AS THE AMERICANS
CONTINUE TO ADVANCE, I THINK
THERE WILL BE MORE PEOPLE
WHO ARE GOING TO BE ASKING
THAT SAME QUESTION AND
WONDERING WHY SHE IS STILL
ON THE FIELD.
WHY DOES THE NFL HAVE A SET
OF RULES AND OTHER TEAMS,
OTHER LEAGUES DON'T HAVE THE
SAME KIND OF-- AREN'T TAKING
IT WITH THE SAME KIND OF
SERIOUSNESS.
>> Woodruff: WE SHOULD SAY
THERE WAS AN ACCUSATION OF
DOMESTIC ABUSE AND THAT
REMAINS TO BE RESOLVED.
NANCY ARMOUR, AT THIS POINT,
HOW MUCH ARE THE FIFA
SCANDALS LOOMING OVER THIS
WOMEN A WORLD CUP?
>> WELL, IT'S KIND OF IRONIC
BECAUSE FIFA HAS ALWAYS VERY
DISMISSIVELY TREATED THE
WOMEN'S GAME.
THEY'RE MAKING THE WOMEN
PLAY ON TURF DURING THIS
WORLD CUP WHICH WOULD NEVER
HAPPEN FOR THE MEN.
AND YET, SO THIS IS THE
FIRST BIG TOURNAMENT SINCE
THE FIFA SCALE DANS BROKE.
AND IS THE ONE CHANCE THAT
FIFA HAS TO KIND OF IMPROVE
ITS REPUTATION AND IMPROVE
ITS IMAGE WITH A GREAT
TOURNAMENT SO IT'S A LITTLE
IRONIC THAT IT IS COMING
FROM THE WOMEN THAT FIFA HAS
BASICALLY BRUSHED ASIDE FOR
DECADES SAYING OH, YOU KNOW,
WE DON'T TAKE YOU AS
SERIOUSLY AS WE DO THE MEN.
>> Woodruff: WELL, I KNOW
YOU ARE WATCHING AND WE WILL
BE TOO, NANCY ARMOUR WITH
"U.S.A. TODAY", WE THANK YOU
>> Woodruff: MEANTIME, TODAY IN
SWITZERLAND, ATTORNEY GENERAL
MICHAEL LAUBER ANNOUNCED THAT
HIS INVESTIGATION INTO FIFA, THE
BODY THAT GOVERNS BOTH THE
WOMEN'S AND MEN'S WORLD CUPS,
WILL INCLUDE MORE THAN 50 CASES
OF MONEY LAUNDERING IN
CONNECTION WITH BIDDING BY THE
2018 AND 2022 HOST COUNTRIES.
QATAR IS SET TO HOST THE 2022
WORLD CUP AND THE COUNTRY IS
RAPIDLY BUILDING THE
INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIRED.
MANY OF THE MEN DOING THAT WORK
ARE FOREIGN NATIONALS AND SOME
OF THEM WORK AMID CONDITIONS
THAT ARE INCREASINGLY COSTING
THEM THEIR LIVES.
JOHN IRVINE OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS HAS THEIR STORY
FROM NEPAL.
>> QATAR AIRWAYS HAS THREE
FLIGHTS A DAY INTO KATHMANDU.
MANY PASSENGERS ARE NEPAL
ESE WORKERS TAKING A BREAK
FROM WORLD CUP RELATED
CONSTRUCTION JOBS IN DOHAR.
THIS WOMAN WAITS FOR HER
HUSBAND BUT FOR MINA, IT
WILL NOT BE A JOYOUS
REUNION.
WHEN HE LEFT FOR QATAR SIX
MONTHS AGO, SHE WAS HIS
WIFE.
TODAY SHE IS HIS WIDOW.
A SAD SIGHT, THE AUTHORITIES
DIDN'T WANT US TO FILM.
THE HUSBAND'S COFFIN LAID
ACROSS TWO BAGGAGE TROLLEYS.
27-YEAR-OLD SHIVA TOMANG
DIED IN A BUILDING SITE
ACCIDENT ON APRIL 19th.
TO COMBINE TO HIS WIDOW'S
GRIEF, IT HAS TAKEN SIX
WEEKS TO REPATE REE ATE HIS
BODY.
AS IF A SINGLE COFFIN WASN'T
BAD ENOUGH THERE WERE TWO
OTHERS ON THE SAME FLIGHT.
AGAIN, THE BODIES WERE THOSE
OF YOUNG MEN, ONE HAD DIED
IN A TRAFFIC ACCIDENT, THE
OTHER FROM A SUNDAY HEART
ATTACK-- A SUDDEN HEART
ATTACK.
CARDIAC ARREST IS THE
BIGGEST KILLER OF MIGRANT
WORKERS IN QATAR.
I PUT IT TO THE NEPALESE
MINISTER OF LABOR THAT THEY
ARE BEING WORKED TO DEATH
BUT HE DISAGREED SAYING IT
WAS AN ORIENTATION PROBLEM.
>> WHEN THEY FINISH THE JOB,
THEY COME BACK TO THEIR
HOME.
AND THEN SUDDENLY THEY OPEN
THE AC, AIR CONDITIONER, SO
THAT IS WHY THIS THAT CASE,
THEY HAVE LIKE HARD TO TAKE
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
>> HE WOULD NOT CRITICIZE
THE QATARIES BECAUSE WAGES
BY NEPALESE WORKERS THERE
AND ELSEWHERE ARE BROAD,
ACCOUNT FOR 30% OF THIS
COUNTRY'S GDP.
THE RECENT EARTHQUAKE WAS A
NATIONAL CAT AMIT THAT THE
NEPALESE MUST TRY TO COPE
WITH EVERY DAY BUT EVERY
OTHER DAY A NEPALESE FAMILY
HAS TO TRY TO COPE WITH THE
SHOCK AND PERSONAL TRAGEDY
THAT IS THE DETED OF A MALE
RELATIVE IN QATAR.
THAT WAS THE AVERAGE DEATH YEAR.
ONE EVERY 48 HOURS.
>> WITH NO WORK AVAILABLE AT
HOME, THESE NEPALESE MEN ARE
CUING FOR PERMITS TO GO TO
THE GULF COUNTRIES INCLUDING
QATAR.
WITHOUT IDENTIFYING HIMSELF
ONE WORKER WHO'S RETURNING
TO QATAR DESCRIBED
ILL-TREATMENT DURING HIS
PREVIOUS STINT THERE.
>> THE FOOD THEY GIVE US IS
OFTEN ROTTEN, PEOPLE IN MY
COMPANY KEEP GETTING
POISONED.
THREE OR FOUR ARE DYING
EVERY MONTH.
THIS IS MY FIRST HOLIDAY IN
THREE YEARS.
MY HOME WAS DESTROYED IN THE
EARTHQUAKE BUT THEY ONLY LET
ME RETURN HERE BECAUSE I
AGREED TO TAKE
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ONE OF
THE DEAD AND BRING HIS BODY
WITH ME.
>>
TO QATAR TO LOOK AT A NEW
ACCOMMODATION BLOCKHOUSEING
MIGRANT WORKERS BUT LATER ON
OUR OWN WE FOUND THESE OLDER
SQUALID QUARTERS CRAMPED
FULL OF NEPALESE LABOURERS
SLEEPING 18 TO A SMALL ROOM.
THESE ARE IMANDS QATAR
DOESN'T WANT THE WORLD TO
SEE.
RECENTLY OTHER BRITISH
JOURNALISTS SEEKING A
SIMILAR GLIMPSE WERE
FOLLOWED, ARRESTED AND
INTERROGATED.
THE QATARIES CLAIM THAT
SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS HAS
BEEN MADE IN IMPROVING THE
LOT OF GUEST LABOURERS BUT
MANDITA DISAGREES.
SHE LOBBIES ON BEHALF OF
MIGRANT WORKERS.
>> WE HAVEN'T REALLY SEEN
ANY MARKED CHANGES IN ITS
WAY THAT THE MIGRANT WORKERS
ARE FARING IN QATAR TODAY AS
COMPARED TO WHAT THEIR
SITUATION WAS FIVE YEARS
EARLIER.
>> SO THE WRL CUP HAS TO THE
BEEN THE CATALYST FOR CHANGE
THAT YOU WOULD HAVE HOPED
FOR.
>> DON'T THINK SO, NO.
>> OKAY.
>> THE BODY OF SHIVA WAS
TAKEN FROM KATHMANDU AIRPORT
TO A BUDDHIST TEMPLE FOR THE
FUNERAL CEREMONY ON
CREMATION.
AS MONKS PERFORMED THE
RITUALS, THE YOUNG MAN'S
WIDOW PASSED OUT AND HIS
MOTHER WAILED.
>> THE CAT AR-- QATAR WORLD
CUP IS NOW UNDER
INVESTIGATION.
THE FB EARNINGS AND THE
SWISS ARE COUNTING THE
ALLEGED COST IN BRIBES.
NEPAL IS COUNTING THE ACTUAL
COST IN LIVES.
>> Ifill: AND TO CUBA.
TONIGHT WE LOOK AT THE COUNTRY'S
POOR ACCESS TO THE INTERNET, THE
PROSPECTS F IMPORROVEMENT, AND
WHAT IT MEANS FOR THE STATE OF
FREE SPEECH ON THE ISLAND.
IT'S THE NEXT CHAPTER IN OUR
SERIES AIRING ALL THIS WEEK ON
THE CUBAN EVOLUTION.
>> Brown: CLASSIC CARS, COLONIAL
BUILDINGS, WHILING AWAY HOURS ON
HAVANA'S FAMOUS OCEAN STRETCH,
THE MALECON.
FOR DECADES CUBA HAS FELT
REMOVED FROM THE FORWARD MARCH
OF TIME, A SENSE THAT'S ONLY
GROWN MORE PRONOUNCED IN THE AGE
OF INFORMATION.
IN AN EVER MORE CONNECTED WORLD,
IT'S A STRANGE FEELING TO GET
OFF OF A SHORT FLIGHT FROM MIAMI
AND FIND THAT THIS ESSENTIALLY
IS USELESS.
IT'S A FEELING OF ISOLATION
THAT'S NOT LOST ON MANY OF THE
PEOPLE WE TALKED TO HERE.
PEOPLE WE TALKED TO HERE. >> (
translated): EVERYTHING,
>> (translated):
EVERYTHING, WE'RE MISSING OUT ON
EVERYTHING,
WE'RE MISSING OUT ON EVERYTHING,
ACTUALLY.
IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO LIVE WITHOUT
COMMUNICATING AND I DON'T KNOW
HOW WE CAN CONTINUE LIKE THIS.
>> Brown: THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT
SAYS THAT 25% OF ITS CITIZENS
HAVE INTERNET ACCESS.
WATCHDOG GROUPS LIKE FREEDOM
HOUSE PUT THE NUMBER ABLE TO
LINK TO A FREE AND OPEN INTERNET
FAR LOWER, AT AROUND FIVE
PERCENT.
EITHER WAY, IT'S ONE OF THE
LOWEST RATES IN THE WESTERN
HEMISPHERE.
HEMISPHERE. >> (
translated): WHEN I
FIRST
>> (translated): WHEN I
FIRST HEARD ABOUT THIS PLACE I
WAS
HEARD ABOUT THIS PLACE I WAS
REALLY SURPRISED BECAUSE I
>> Brown: THIS IS PERHAPS CUBA'S
ONLY FREE WIFI CAFE, OPENED IN A
QUIET HAVANA NEIGHBORHOOD
EARLIER THIS YEAR BY ALEXIS
LEIVA MACHADO, A RENOWNED CUBAN
ARTIST BETTER KNOWN AS KCHO.
HE'S PERSONALLY CLOSE TO THE
CASTRO BROTHERS-- FORMER
PRESIDENT FIDEL EVEN MADE A RARE
PUBLIC APPEARANCE LAST YEAR TO
ATTEND THE OPENING OF HIS
CULTURAL CENTER.
THAT MIGHT EXPLAIN WHY KCHO'S
ALLOWED TO OFFER THIS SPACE AS A
KIND OF ART PROJECT.
IT'S NOT CLEAR HOW LONG IT WILL
CONTINUE, BUT YOUNG CUBANS ARE
PACKING THE PLACE WHILE IT
LASTS.
LASTS. >> (translated
): I'M HERE TO
>> (translated): I'M
HERE TO GET IN TOUCH WITH MY
GIRLFRIEND
GET IN TOUCH WITH MY GIRLFRIEND
AND GET SOME SCHOOL STUFF WORKED
OUT.
I COME HERE TO GET SOME
INFORMATION FOR THAT.
INFORMATION FOR THAT. >> (
translated): I COME HERE
>> (translated): I COME
HERE TO GET ONLINE TO KNOW ABOUT
MY
TO GET ONLINE TO KNOW ABOUT MY
FRIENDS, GET IN TOUCH WITH MY
FAMILY, AND I WOULD LOVE IF I
COULD DO TH SOISMEWHERE ELSE
TOO.
>> Brown: WHY DOESN'T ANYONE
HAVE A WIFI CONNECTION AT HOME?
>> (translated): I
DON'T KNOW.
DON'T KNOW. THE STATE, MAYBE.
THE STATE, MAYBE.
>> THE INTERNET IN CUBA IS VERY
MUCH A LUXURY FOR THOSE WHO CAN
AFFORD IT TODAY IN 2015.
>> Brown: RAUL MOAZ IS EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF ROOTS OF HOPE, A
MIAMI-BASED NONPROFIT WITH
BRANCHES AROUND THE US,
INCLUDING IN WASHINGTON, D.C.,
WHERE HE SPOKE TO US.
HIS GROUP HAS BEEN WORKING TO
INCREASE CUBANS' ACCESS TO
TECHNOLOGY.
SENDING CELL PHONES, LAPTOPS AND
THUMB DRIVES TO CUBA SINCE 2008,
WHEN RAUL CASTRO BEGAN EASING
RESTRICTIONS ON THESE CONSUMER
DEVICES.
>> SO WHEN CUBA LEGALIZED THE
USE OF CELL PHONES IN 2008 THEY
REALLY PRICED OUT THE MAJORITY
OF THE MARKET.
SO ONE CELL PHONE WOULD COST
AROUND 100 CUC, $100.
THAT'S FIVE TO SIX MONTHS WAGES
FOR ANY AVERAGE PERSON ON THE
ISLAND.
SO UNLESS YOU HAD FAMILY IN THE
DIASPORA THAT WAS ABLE TO SEND
YOU A REMITTANCE FOR THAT
AMOUNT, THE AVERAGE CUBAN WASN'T
ABLE TO BUY THAT.
>> Brown: AFTER YEARS OF
PAINFULLY SLOW DIAL UP SERVICE
VIA SATELLITE, IN 2013
UNDERGROUND FIBER OPTIC CABLES
LAID TO VENEZUELA WERE SWITCHED
ON, ALLOWING CUBA BROADBAND
ACCESS.
YET TODAY THAT ACCESS IS SPOTTY
AT BEST, AND FAR TOO EXPENSIVE.
CUBANS CAN VISIT 150 OR SO
STATE-OWNED TELECOM CENTERS,
WHERE THEY CAN PAY RELATIVELY
LITTLE TO SEND EMAIL AND ACCESS
CUBA'S INTERNAL NETWORK, ITS
INTRANET.
THEY MUST PAY MUCH MORE TO REACH
THE GLOBAL INTERNET, WHICH THEY
CAN ALSO DO AT TOURIST HOTELS,
WHERE IT'S EVEN MORE EXPENSIVE,
OUNARD $10 AN HOUR, IN A COUNTRY
WHERE THE AVERAGE CUBAN EARNS
BETWEEN 14 AND $22 A MONTH.
BETWEEN 14 AND $22 A MONTH. >> (
translated): I DON'T
HAVE
>> (translated): I
DON'T HAVE A BUDGET TO BE PAYING
FOR THE
A BUDGET TO BE PAYING FOR THE
INTERNET AT THE PCES RIWE HAVE
AT ANY OTHER PLACE.
AT ANY OTHER PLACE. >> (
translated): IT SHOULD
>> (translated): IT
SHOULD CHANGE SOON BECAUSE WE
ARE
CHANGE SOON BECAUSE WE ARE
TALKING TO OUR NEW FRIENDS IN
THE US, THE AMERICANS AND
HOPEFULLY WE'RE GOING TO GET
THERE SOON AND THERE'S GOING TO
BE SOME PROGRESS ON THIS.
>> Brown: THAT'S THE HOPE,
ANYWAY, THAT WITH THE NEW TALKS
THERE WILL BE AN EASING OF
RESTRICTIONS FOR U.S. TELECOMS
DOING BUSINESS HERE, AND NEW
WIFI SPOTS WILL SPRING UP.
AND RAUL MOAZ, OF ROOTS OF HOPE,
SAYS HE THINKS MORE OF THAT WILL
COME, ALONG WITH CHEAPER
SERVICES, LITTLE BY LITTLE.
>> RAUL CASTRO TAKES A VERY
CAUTIONARY APPROACH TO THE
REFORMS HE'S IMPLEMENTED,
PARTICULARLY AROUND THE ECONOMIC
REFORMS HE'S IMPLEMENTED AROUND
SMALL BUSINESSES.
SO YOU OPEN UP SMALL BUSINESSES
IN SOME SECTORS TO SOME EXTENT
WITH VERY HIGH TAXES.
AND THEN ONCE YOU SEE THE TRAIN
THEY'RE STILL IN POWER, YOU OPEN
UP A LITTLE BIT MORE.
AND I THINK THE SAME THING IS
HAPPENING WITH THE INTERNET.
THEY RECOGNIZE THE NEED FOR CUBA
TO BE CONNECTED TO THE
GLOBALIZED ECONOMY, BUT THEY'RE
TAKING IT PIECEMEAL, DAY BY DAY.
>> Brown: BUT HOW MUCH OF AN
OPENING?
THE GOVERNMENT STILL CONTROLS
MASS MEDIA, LIKE TELEVISION,
RADIO AND GRANMA, THE OFFICIAL
PAPER OF THE CMUNIOMST PARTY.
>> MY IMPRESSION FROM TALKING TO
MY CUBAN FRIENDS IS THAT THEY
ARE MORE THAN JUST A LITTLE BIT
CYNICAL, THEY CONTINUE TO BE
CYNICAL ABOUT WHAT THEY READ IN
THE NEWSPAPERS, ANESPED CIALLY
WHAT THEYEE O SN TELEVISION.
>> Brown: JOSEPH GONZALEZ, A
PROFESSOR AT APPALACHIAN STATE
UNIVERSITY WHO'S BEEN COMING TO
CUBA FOR YEARS, DOES SEE PEOPLE
SPEAKING MORE FREELY HERE,
INCLUDING EXPRESSING OPEN
DISTRUST OF STATE MEDIA.
>> AT THE SAME TIME, I'VE ALSO
HEARD FROM SOME OF MY COLLEAGUES
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF HAVANA, WHO
HAVE OFFICIAL CONNECTIONS, THAT
POLITICAL CHANGE IS NOT ON THE
HORIZON, THIS IS ABOUT AS FAR AS
IT'S GOING TO GO.
THEY WANT TO SEE ECONOMIC
CHANGE, BUT THE GOVERNMENT AS A
WHOLE, AND THE COMMUNIST PARTY
IN PARTICULAR, IS NOT INTERESTED
IN SIGNIFICANT POLITICAL CHANGE.
>> (translated): AND
FOR THAT
FOR THAT REASON THE GOVERNMENT
LIMITS THE
REASON THE GOVERNMENT LIMITS THE
ARRIVAL OF THE INTERNET IN CUBA.
>> Brown: MANUEL MONS IS A 26-
YEAR-OLD BLOGGER AND PART OF A
CUBAN REFORM MOVEMENT CALLED
"SOMOS MAS"-- WE ARE MORE.
"SOMOS MAS"-- WE ARE MORE. >> (
translated): FIRST OF
ALL,
>> (translated): FIRST
OF ALL, THE GOVERNMENT IS
DOESN'T WANT
THE GOVERNMENT IS DOESN'T WANT
THE INTERNET IN CUBA.
THE GOVERNMENT IS AFRAID OF
HAVING THE INTERNET IN CUBA.
THE GOVERNMENT IS AFRAID OF THE
DAY THAT PEOPLE ACTUALLY HAVE
TRUE ACCESS TO THE INTERNET.
>> HE AND OTHER BLOGGERS, LIKE
YOANI SANCHEZ OF 14YMEDIO,
TOUTED AS CUBA'S FIRST
INDEPENDENT DIGITAL NEWS SITE,
MUST SEND ARTICLES ABROAD VIA
EMAIL TO BE PUBLISHED.
INSIDE CUBA THEIR SITES ARE
BLOCKED.
TO REACH A CUBAN AUDIENCE, THEY
DELIVER ARTICLES PERSON TO
PERSON ON WHAT'S KNOWN AS THE
PACKET -- EXTERNAL DRIVES THAT
CONTAIN ARTICLES, TV SHOWS AND
MOVIES, A KIND OF OFFLINE
NETFLIX.
NETFLIX. >> (translated
): I THINK THE
>> (translated): I
THINK THE INTERNET IS
FUNDAMENTAL FOR THIS
INTERNET IS FUNDAMENTAL FOR THIS
CHANGE TO HAPPEN, AND THE
QUICKER THE INTERNET COMES THE
QUICKER THE CHANGES IN CUBA WILL
COME.
COME. >> (translated
): THE MAJORITY
>> (translated): THE
MAJORITY OF YOUNG PEOPLE FEELS
LIKE I DO.
OF YOUNG PEOPLE FEELS LIKE I DO.
THE MAJORITY OF YOUNG PEOPLE
WANT A CHANGE IN CUBA, THE
MAJORITY OF YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT.
BUT THE MAJORITY OF YOUNG PEOPLE
PREFERS TO KEEP QUIET OUT OF
FEAR.
>> Brown: BUT YOU'RE NOT AFRAID?
translated): NO, NOT AT
ALL.
I THINK THE GOVERNMENT IS MORE
AFRAID OF ME THAN I AM OF THEM.
>> Brown: MONS SAYS THAT MORE
YOUNG PEOPLE MUST CONFRONT THEIR
FEARS AND THE STATE, DEMANDING
CHANGE.
REPORTING FROM HAVANA AND
WASHINGTON, I'M JEFFREY BROWN
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: OUR CUBA COVERAGE
CONTINUES TOMORROW, WITH A LOOK
AT THE BOOMING ART MARKET AND
HOW IT REFLECTS A CHANGING
ATTITUDE TOWARD SMALL BUSINESS.
>> Brown: INDEED, ARTISTS HERE
ARE POSITIVELY ENTREPRENEURIAL.
ADRIAN FERNANDEZ AND HIS
PARTNERS WERE ABLE TO CREATE
THIS UPSCALE STUDIO AFTER NEW
LAWS MADE IT POSSIBLE TO BUY AND
SELL PROPERTY.
THEY NOW SELL THEIR WORK
DIRECTLY TO CONSUMERS, MOSTLY
ABROAD, AVOIDING GOVERNMENT-RUN
GALLERIES AND REAPING THEIR OWN
PROFITS.
>> IT'S DEALING DIRECTLY WITH
THE PEOPLE THAT REACH US HERE,
WE CONNECT DIRECTLY.
>> Ifill: AND BEHIND EVERY GOOD
REPORTING TRIP, IS A GOOD FIXER
-- THESE ARE THE MEN AND WOMEN
WHO LIVE AND WORK IN THE
COUNTRY, WHO HELP REPORTERS LIKE
JEFF GAIN ACCESS TO THEE
YOU SEE IN OUR STORIES.
IN HAVANA, THAT WAS JOSUE LOPEZ.
ONLINE, HE GIVES US A GUIDED
TOUR OF HAVANA FROM A LOCAL'S
PERSPECTIVE-- IT'S A NEW SERIES
WE'RE CALLING, "THE FIXER'S
GUIDE," AND YOU CAN FIND THAT,
ON OUR HOME PAGE.
>> Woodruff: NOW WE TURN TO OUR
OCCASIONAL SERIES ON
IMPRISONMENT AND CRIMINAL
JUSTICE IN AMERICA.
SOME REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS
ARE UNITING OVER REFORM IDEAS.
TONIGHT IN OUR "BROKEN JUSTICE"
SERIES, WILLIAM BRANGHAM LOOKS
AT A HIGH PROFILE IDEA THAT
CENTERS AROUND FELONS, AND THEIR
LIVES AFTER PRISON.
THE NATION'S BIGGEST CITY
NEW YORK JUST BECAME THE
LATEST IN A NATIONAL
MOVEMENT TO REWRITE THE
HIRING PROCESS AND GIVE
CONVICTED FELONS A BETTER
CHANCE AT LANDING A JOB.
SUPPORTERS GATHERED A FEW
DAYS AGO AS THE NEW YORK
CITY COUNCIL VOTED OVERWHELM-
INGLY TO BLOCK EMPLOYERS
FROM ASKING JOB APPLICANTS
IF THEY HAVE A CRIMINAL
HISTORY.
THE LAW IS KNOWN AS BAN THE
BOX.
IT WOULD DO AWAY WITH THE
QUESTION OR BOX ON JOB
APPLICATIONS ASKING IF A
WORKER HAS SERVED TIME IN
PRISON OR HAD A RECORD.
THE IDEA IS SPREADING.
SO FAR 17 STATES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY AND MORE THAN 100
CITIES AND COUNTIES HAVE
PASSED SIMILAR BAN THE BOX
LAWS, WE GET TWO DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVE.
DARRYL ATKINSON.
AND ELIZABETH MOLITO IS
SENIOR EXECUTIVE COUNCIL FOR
THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF
INDEPENDENT BUSINESS.
DARRELL ATKINSON, I KNOW
THIS IS NOT JUST A MATTER OF
PUBLIC POLICY FOR YOU THIS
IS VERY PERSONAL IN YOUR OWN
TORE STORY, CAN YOU TELL US
ABOUT THAT?
>> SURE, WILLIAM.
IN 1996 I WAS CONVICTED OF A
FIRST TIME VIOLENT DRUG
CRIME.
I SPENT 40 MONTHS IN PRISON
IN THE ALABAMA DEPARTMENT OF
CORRECTIONS.
I WENT IN TO PRISON WITH A
HIGH SAL DIPLOMA, I CAME OT
WITH A HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA.
FORTUNATELY ENOUGH FOR ME HI
A LOVING FAMILY THAT
PROVIDED ME FOOD, CLOTHING
AND SHELTER AND I HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO ACHIEVE A CERTAIN
DEGREE OF SUCCESSFUL I'VE
GOTTEN MY EDUCATION.
I'M LICENSED TO PRACTICE LAW
IN MINNESOTA AN NORTH
CAROLINA.
I WAS HONORED AT THE WHITE
HOUSE AS A CHAMPION OF
CHANGE IN REMOVING BARRIERS
FOR PEOPLE WITH RECORDS, BUT
I DON'T TELL THAT STORY TO
HIGHLIGHT ANY EXCEPTIONABLE
ATTRIBUTES ABOUT ME.
I BELIEVE MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
WHO CYCLE IN AND OUT OF OUR
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM CAN
BE SUCCESSFUL AS WELL IF
THEY HAVE THE NECESSARY
SUPPORT.
SO WE BAN THE BOX IN BOTH
DURHAM CITY AND BURRHAM-- DURHAM
COUNTY AND IN 2011 AND
20126789 AND WE HAVE SEEN
THE PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE
HIRED WITHOUT HAVE CRIMINAL
RECORDS GO UP EVERY YEAR
WITHOUT ANY INCREASES IN
WORKPLACE THEFT OR CRIME.
NONE OF THESE FOLKS HAVE
BEEN SUBSEQUENTLY TERMINATED
BECAUSE THEY COMMITTED A
SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE.
>> WHAT ABOUT THIS ARGUMENT
THAT IF YOU KNOW SOMEONE HAS
A CRIMINAL RECORD, THAT THE
PREJUDICE AGAINST THAT IS
JUST SO GREAT THAT, IN FACT,
PEOPLE WHO HAVE DONE THEIR
TIME, SERVED THEIR SENTENCE,
THAT THEY SHOULD HAVE A SHOT
AT GETTING A JOB JUST LIKE
EVERYBODY ELSE.
>> AND YOU KNOW, THESE
POLICIES, THERE IS A LOT
OF-- BEHIND THEM BUT THERE
IS A COST AND FOR SMALL
BUSINESSES WHOM I REPRESENT,
THE COSTS CAN BE PRETTY
STEEP THIS IS NOT A GOOD
POLICY IN ALL BUSINESSES IN
ALL INDUSTRIES.
THE ONE SIZE FITS ALL IS
VERY DIFFICULT.
IN MANY INSTANCES A SMALL
BUSINESS RETURNING A SMALL
CONTRACTING COMPANY, RUNNING
A SMALL CONVENIENCE STORE
NEEDS TO BE I BELIEVE TO
ABORT THE HIRING PROCESS
SOONER RATHER THAN LATER.
IT IS THE BUSINESS OWNER WHO
IS GOING THROUGH THE
APPLICATION, SETTING UP THE
INTERYOU HAVES, BRINGING THE
INDIVIDUALS IN, AND IN
CERTAIN INSTANCES EITHER BY
FEDERAL OR STATE LAW THEY
CAN'T HIRE INDIVIDUALS WITH
CERTAIN CONVICTIONS.
>> DARRELL, AS YOU'VE GONE
AROUND THE COUNTRY AND
TALKING TO EMPLOYERS, HOW DO
YOU CONVINCE THEM, WHEN THEY
MIGHT SAY LOOK, I'M PEOPLE
FOR SOME SENSITIVE WORK.
I MIGHT BE PUTTING PEOPLE
INTO PEOPLE'S HOMES, THAT I
HAVE A DUTY TO KNOW WHETHER
OR NOT I CAN TRUST THIS
PERSON'S ACTIONS, WHAT DOW
SAY TO THOSE EMPLOYERS?
>> SO I'M A DAD.
I HAVE A THREE-YEAR-OLD.
I DROP MY THREE-YEAR-OLD OFF
AT DAY CARE EVERY SINGLE
DAY.
WOULD I WANT TO KNOW OR
WOULD I BE CONCERNED AS A
PARENT IF ONE OF HER DAY
CARE TEACHERS HAD A PAST
HISTORY OF CHILD ABUSE, I
WOULD.
THAT WOULD BE CONCERNING TO
ME.
SO THAT PARTICULAR POSITION
MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR
SOMEONE WITH THAT CRIMINAL
RECORD HISTORY.
WHAT WE'RE ENCOURAGING
EMPLOYERS TO DO, BOTH LARGE
AND SMALL ARE TO DO THESE
INDIVIDUALIZED ASSESSMENTS
AND NOT TREAT ALL CRIMES THE
SAME.
BECAUSE SOME CRIMES MAY NOT
HAVE ANY RELEVANCE TO
WHETHER SOMEONE IS SUITABLE
FOR A GIVEN POSITION.
>> WHAT ABOUT THAT POINT.
WOULD SMALL BUSINESSES BE
OKAY WITH THE IDEA THAT YOU
DON'T ASK PEOPLE ABOUT THEIR
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK
RIGHT AWAY.
YOU VET THE CANDIDATES AND
THEN IF YOU ARE ABOUT READY
TO MAKE AN OFFER THEN YOU
CAN CHECK AND SEE IF IT IS
RELEVANT AS DARRELL WAS
SAYING, WOULD YOU SUPPORT
THAT IDEA.
>> I SUPPORT VETTING
CANDIDATES, MOST CERTAINLY.
BUT THE EMPLOYER NEEDS TO
HAVE THE INFORMATION ABOUT
CRIMINAL HISTORY DURING THE
INTERVIEW.
THE FACT THAT THEY DON'T
RAISE THAT IN THE INTERVIEW,
THAT THERE IS A GAP THAT
MAYBE NOW A BUSINESS OWN
CERTIFICATE AFRAID TO
DISCUSS BECAUSE THEY CAN'T
TALK ABOUT CRIMINAL HISTORY
UNTIL AFTER THEY MADE A
CONDITIONAL OFFER IS KIND OF
LEWD I CRUC FOR A
SMALL-BUSINESS OWNER.
SOME OF THE PROPOSALS TO, IN
NEW YORK CITY IS ONE TOO,
THAT THEY DON'T HAVE TO
ACTUALLY PROVIDE, YOU KNOW,
A WRITTEN REASON WHY IT IS
THEY DIDN'T HIRE SOMEBODY
BECAUSE OF CRIMINAL
CONVICTION THAT WILL JUST
SRND PEOPLE OFF TO AN
ATTORNEY.
>> OKAY, WE'VE GOT TO LEAVE
IT THERE.
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NEXT, IN OUR
CONTINUING SERIES ON PAKISTAN:
ONE EFFORT TO TACKLE A
WIDESPREAD PUBLIC HEALTH PROBLEM
THAT GETS SCANT ATTENTION.
IT'S PART OF OUR "AGENTS FOR
CHANGE" SERIES.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FRED DE
SAM LAZARO REPORTS FROM KARACHI.
>> Reporter: FOR DECADES
PAKISTAN HAS BEEN IN A STATE OF
POST TRAUMATIC STRESS: FROM THE
AFGHAN WAR, ETHNITENSC ION,
RELIGIOUS VIOLENCE, TERRORISM.
THE ECONOMY, HINDEREBYD
CORRUPTION, DOES LITTLE TO
REDUCE THE POVERTY THAT DRIVES
SO MUCH OF THE TURMOIL.
IT'S ENOUGH TO DRIVE ANYONE
CRAZY.
AND PSYCHIATRIST SAADIA
QURAISHY, WITH THE PAKISTAN
BASED AMAN FOUNDATION SAYS,
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT IT DOES TO A
LOT OF PEOPLE.
>> ABOUT 40% OF THE POPULATION
SUFFERS FROM COMMON MENTAL
DISORDERS.
>> Reporter: FOUR ZERO?
>> YES.
AND SOME INFORMAL REPORTS
SUGGEST EVEN HIGHER.
>> Reporter: 57-YEAR-OLD
SHOPKEEPER ANWAR KHASKELI
PRESENTS A CLASSIC CASE...
PRESENTS A CLASSIC CASE... >> (
translated): I WROTE
>> (translated): I
WROTE ARTICLES FOR YEARS ABOUT
WHY ARE
ARTICLES FOR YEARS ABOUT WHY ARE
THE BASIC NECESSITIES OF LIFE
NOTEING B PROVIDED TO PEOPLE
HERE, LIKE WATER, ROADS,
SCHOOLS, ESPECIALLY EDUCATION.
>> Reporter: BETWEEN THOSE
WORRIES AND A GROWING INABILITY
TO MAKE ENDS MEET, HE SAYS HE
SIMPLY WITHDREW.
SIMPLY WITHDREW. >> (
translated): FOR TEN
>> (translated): FOR
TEN YEARS, I COULDN'T SIT IN IT
FOR
YEARS, I COULDN'T SIT IN IT FOR
MORE THAN TEN MINUTES, MY MOOD
WAS JUST DOWN.
MY JOINTS WOULD HURT, THAT MADE
THE DEPRESSION WORSE.
THIS WENT ON FOR TEN YEARS.
>> Reporter: MOST MENTAL ILLNESS
LIKE HIS GOES UNREPORTED,
UNDIAGNOSED OR UNTREATED.
THROUGHOUT SOUTH ASIA, IT'S
SOCIALLY TABOO, OFTEN VIEWED AS
A CURSE FROM GOD, NOT AN
ILLNESS.
PATIENTS HAVE OFTEN BEEN
RESTRAINED IN CHAINS AND
SUBJECTED TO OTHER HUMILIATION
SAYS DR. QURAISHY.
>> IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO
EXPRESS MENTAL HEALTH SYMPTOMS
NOT ONLY TO THE CLINICIANS OR
PROFESSIONALS BUT EVEN TO
YOURSELF AND TO THE FAMILIES,
THERE'S SUCH A STIGMA RELATED TO
THAT.
ITS MUCH MORE ACCEPTABLE TO SAY
YOU HAVE A HEADACHE OR
STOMACHACHE OR A BACKACHE FOR
WHICH YOU CAN BE TAKEN OUT TO
GET HELP.
>> Reporter: NOT THAT MUCH HELP
IS AVAILABLE.
VERY FEW PAKISTANI DOCTORS ARE
TRAINED TO DIAGNOSE PSYCHIATRIC
DISORDERS, WHETHER SERIOUS ONES
LIKE SCHIZOPHRENIA OR COMMON
ONES LIKE DEPRESSION.
THIS IS A COUNTRY OF 200 MILLION
PEOPLE AND FOR ALL OF THEM,
THERE ARE MAYBE 500 PRACTICING
PSYCHIATRISTS.
IN ALL LIKELIHOOD THERE ARE MORE
PSYCHIATRISTS OF PAKII
ORIGIN WORKING TODAY IN THE
UNITED STATES AND BRITAIN THAN
IN ALL OF PAKISTAN
>> IN TERMS OF PAKISTAN, THAT IS
THE SORT OF NUMBER, AND
GENERALLY IN THE DEVELOPING
WORLD, IN THE POOR WORLD, YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT 1.5 MILLION PEOPLE
PER PSYCHIATRIST.
>> Reporter: WHAT IS IT HERE IN
BRITAIN, OR IN THE UNITED
STATES?
>> OH, IT'S ABOUT 1 PER 10,000.
>> Reporter: CHRIS UNDERHILL IS
THE FOUNDER OF A BRITISH BASED
AID GROUP CALLED BASIC NEEDS,
WHICH TRIES TO DELIVER MENTAL
HEALTH CARE DESPITE THE
CHALLENGES.
PARTNERING WITH LOCAL NON-
PROFITS, IT BEGAN RUNNING
CLINICS HERE
NO FANCY COUCHES HERE, JUST A
TEMPORARY ONE-ROOM, ONE STOP
PSYCHIATRIC WARD.
>> DO YOU GET ANGRY A LOT?
>> Reporter: ON THIS RECENT
MORNING, DR SALIM AHMED SWIFTLY
DISPATCHED PATIENTS, MOST IN
FOLLOW UP VISITS.
THEIR PRESCRIPTIONS WERE
REFILLED A FEW FEET AWAY.
SOME PATIENTS WERE SENT TO
COUNSELING BEHIND THE CURTAIN IN
THE CORNER.
>> THE TEAM MAKES SURE THEY ARE
TAKING THE MEDIRICATIONS.
IF THEY ARE HAVING ANY SIDE
EFFECTS, THEY COMMUNICATE WITH
US.
>> Reporter: THE TEAM HE WORKS
WITH IS MAINLY DRAWN FROM THE
LOCAL COMMUNITY.
WITH ROLE PLAYING AND SKITS,
ORDINARY CITIZENS ARE TRAINED AS
OUTREACH WORKERS TO FOLLOW UP ON
PATIENTS, TO LOOK FOR SYMPTOMS
OR SIDE EFFECTS AND REFER
PATIENTS BACK WHEN CLINICS AR
HELD.
FAMILIES DEALING WITH MENTAL
ILLNESS ARE BROUGHT TOGETHER.
THEY GET TRAINING IN SKILLS,
LIKE SEWING, WHICH MAY EARN SOME
INCOME AND REDUCE STRESS.
THIS HOLISTIC APPROACH-- GENERIC
DRUGS AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE,
HAS ALREADY REACH 43,000 PEOPLE
IN JUST TWO YEARS IN PAKISTAN.
OTHER COUNTRIES WHERE THIS MODEL
HAS BEEN TRIED SAY IT WORKS AND
IS INEXPENSIVE
>> Reporter: ALONG WITH ANTI
DEPRESSANT MEDS, ANWAR KHASKELI
RECEIVED A MICRO LOAN FROM THE
BASIC NEEDS PROGRAM TO REOPEN
HIS TINY STORE.
HIS TINY STORE. >> (
translated): ALL I WANT
IS
>> (translated): ALL I
WANT IS ENOUGH FOR THREE MEALS A
DAY.
ENOUGH FOR THREE MEALS A DAY.
I DON'T WANT ANY RICHES,
ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: BUSINESS ISN'T
GREAT AND HIS RECOVERY IS STILL
PRECARIOUS.
IT MIGHT BE A METAPHOR FOR
MENTAL HEALTH CARE IN POOR
COUNTRIES.
IT JUST DON'T ESSEEM AS PRESSING
TO GOVERNMENTS AS OTHER ISSUES,
EVEN THOUGH IT EXACTS A HUGE
TOLL, SAYS UNDERHILL.
>> LITERALLY LAST YEAR,
$2.5 TRILLION CAME OUT OF THE
GLOBAL ECONOMY BECAUSE OF MENTAL
ILL HEALTH.
NOW, BRINGING THAT DOWN TO THE
LEVEL OF POLICY-MAKERS IN ONE
COUNTRY, PAKISTAN, ISN'T EASY.
>> Reporter: HE HAS A SIMILAR
CHALLENGE WITH MANY WESTERN
DONORS, ON WHOM BASIC NEEDS
RELIES HEAVILY FOR SUPPORT.
>> IF YOU TAKE ONE OF THE BIG
CITIES IN THE UNITED STATES, IT
COULD BE SAN FRANCISCO, IT COULD
BE NEW YORK, AND YOU THINK ABOUT
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE
MENTAL ILLNESS ON THE STREETS,
'S AIT VERY COMMON
CONVERSATIONAL GAMBIT THAT I
HAVE PEOPLE TALK TO ME ABOUT.
I TALK TO THEM ABOUT THE
DEVELOPING WORLD AND THEY SAY
BUT IT'S RIGHT ON OUR STREETS.
>> Reporter: DESPITE THE
PRESENCE OF MENTALLY ILL PEOPLE
ON U.S. STREETS, UNDERHILL SAYS
THE HARSH REALITY IS THAT ABOUT
THREE FOURTHS OF THE 450 MILLION
PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS
WORLDWIDE, ARE IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES AND THREE FOURTHS OF
THEM ARE UNTREATED.
IN PAKISTAN'S SINDH PROVINCE,
I'M FRED DE SAM LAZARO FOR THE
PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: FRED'S REPORTING IS
A PARTNERSHIP WITH THE UNDER-
TOLD STORIES PROJECT AT ST.
MARY'S UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA.
>> Ifill: IT'S GRADUATION
SEASON, AND OUR NETWORK OF
STUDENT REPORTING LABS AROUND
THE COUNTRY HAVE DOCUMENTED THE
STORIES OF TEENAGERS WHO HAVE
TAKEN AN UNCONVENTIONAL PATH TO
THEIR DIPLOMA.
HERE'S A PREVIEW.
HIGH SCHOOL EDUCATION HAS
TAKEN ME TO DIFFERENT PATHS,
THAT I DID NOT DECIDE I WAS
GOING TO GO THROUGH WHEN I
WAS A LITTLE CHILD.
>> ANYONE THAT HAS CHANGE IN
THEIR LIFE, YOU HAVE TO LACK
ON THE BRIGHT SIDE OF IT.
>> I WAS LIVING IN A-- THERE
WAS NOTHING THERE, NOTHING,
NOTHING AT ALL.
I WANT TO WORK HARD RIGHT
NOW.
SO WHEN I GET OLDER,-- I CAN
FULFILL MY DREAM.
>> I THINK I'M READY.
I STILL HAVE A LOT OF
GROWING UP TO DO.
BUT I THINK I'M READY FOR
COLLEGE.
>> Ifill: ALL THAT AND MORE IS
ON OUR WEB SITE,
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, ON THE DAY POPE
FRANCIS ANNOUNCES A HISTORIC
STATEMENT ON CLIMATE CHANGE,
I'LL HAVE AN EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW
WITH CARDINAL DONALD WUERL,
ARCHBISHOP OF WASHINGTON.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.